docs: Trunk-based development use case tutorial (#8867)
Unleash/unleash: website/docs/feature-flag-tutorials/use-cases/trunk-based-development.md

### Microservices vs. Monoliths

The underlying application architecture can also influence the optimal trunk-based development strategy. Teams working on monolithic applications may find more success with less frequent merges, while those working on microservices may benefit from a more continuous integration approach.

**Monolithic Applications**:

-   Larger, more tightly coupled codebase
-   Merging at set intervals (e.g., daily) may be more suitable to manage integration complexity
-   Increased emphasis on rigorous testing and staged deployments

**Microservices**:

-   Smaller, more loosely coupled services
-   Merging every commit is often more feasible due to reduced integration challenges
-   Enables more independent development and deployment of individual services

## Create Feature Flags for Incomplete Features

Some of the most appropriate feature candidates for trunk-based development are features with significant potential impact on users that may require thorough testing.

> In TBD, developers merge incomplete code into the main branch. Unleash feature flags allow this to happen safely by keeping the feature hidden or disabled, ensuring the trunk remains in a releasable state. The flag starts as “off” in production while the feature is incomplete. The flag can be on in development and/or a testing environment until the feature is complete and ready to go live in production for all users.

Reviewer: OMG so many TLAs TBH

Seriously though, I think that's fine. From a quick Google search, it seems like all the cool kids are doing that these days

I'm a fan of introducing it once with the acronym - trunk based development (TBD) and then just using the acronym going forwarda

> In TBD, developers merge incomplete code into the main branch. Unleash feature flags allow this to happen safely by keeping the feature hidden or disabled, ensuring the trunk remains in a releasable state. The flag starts as “off” in production while the feature is incomplete. The flag can be on in development and/or a testing environment until the feature is complete and ready to go live in production for all users.

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with this acronym for trunk-based development. Makes me think of 'to be determined' which is very common. I would be concerned about causing more confusion than the amount of time it saves when reading

> In TBD, developers merge incomplete code into the main branch. Unleash feature flags allow this to happen safely by keeping the feature hidden or disabled, ensuring the trunk remains in a releasable state. The flag starts as “off” in production while the feature is incomplete. The flag can be on in development and/or a testing environment until the feature is complete and ready to go live in production for all users.

Reviewer: > I'm not familiar with this acronym
Also had to Google it

With Unleash set up, you can use your application to talk to Unleash through one of our [SDKs](/reference/sdks).

In this tutorial, you will:

1. [Explore many trunk-based development strategies](#choose-the-right-trunk-based-development-strategy-for-your-team)
2. [Create feature flags for incomplete features](#create-feature-flags-for-incomplete-features)
3. [Control feature rollouts](#control-feature-rollouts)
4. [Simplify rollbacks with Unleash](#simplify-rollbacks)
5. [Archive and remove feature flags](#archive-and-remove-feature-flags)

## Choose the Right Trunk-Based Development Strategy for Your Team

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to implementing trunk-based development. Different teams may benefit from varying strategies based on their needs, project complexity, and development culture.

In this section, we'll explore the common trunk-based development strategies and their trade-offs to help you choose the best approach for your organization.

### Merge Every Commit

> The most frequent approach to trunk-based development is merging every commit directly into the main branch. This strategy maximizes the rate of continuous integration and delivery, as changes are integrated into the trunk as soon as they are ready. Some advantages are:

Author: I wouldn't call this an absolute and can be based on team size: https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com/committing-straight-to-the-trunk/
I like "the most straightforward approach" or simplest approach.

-   Rapid feedback loops and quicker issue resolution
-   Reduced risk of large, complex merges

> -   Encourages small, frequent commits

Reviewer: Going directly via commits without branches also means review is really challenging!

Some challenges with merging every commit are:

-   Potential for more frequent build breaks and test failures
-   Increased need for effective merging strategies
-   Requirement for robust automated testing and CI/CD pipelines

> ### Merge at Set Intervals

Reviewer: I've never heard of anyone advocating this. Not a challenge, just curious who's going this route, this sounds really painful!

Edit: I see Atlassian is recommending this, which explains why I think that's crazy

Another common strategy is to merge changes into the trunk at regular, predefined intervals, such as daily or before the end of each work day. This approach offers a balance between frequent integration and managing work-in-progress.

**Advantages**:

-   Improved control over the integration process
-   Reduced risk of breaking the build with frequent merges
-   Easier to manage and identify integration issues

**Challenges**:

-   Longer feedback loops compared to merging every commit
-   Potential for larger, more complex merges
-   Requires discipline to adhere to the defined merge cadence

> ### Benefits of Short-Lived Feature Branches

Reviewer: This is 100% a personal feeling so take it for what it's worth.

I know folks often call these branches short lived feature branches but I think that completely misses the point. A feature is often cleaved up into pieces that span many short lived branches, a toggle prevents an incomplete feature being exposed before it's done

**Challenges to Address**

The most significant challenge is maintaining the discipline required to keep branches truly short-lived. Teams must develop the skill of breaking down work into small, mergeable units. Additionally, this approach demands a robust testing and CI/CD pipeline to ensure that frequent merges don't compromise code quality or stability. Teams must invest in automated testing and deployment infrastructure to support rapid integration cycles.

Regardless of the specific strategy, Unleash feature flag management capabilities are designed to support a wide range of trunk-based development styles, empowering you to implement the best strategy for your teams.

> ### Microservices vs. Monoliths

Reviewer: This is bit of a hairy topic. I think all the points you've listed here can be challenged because they depend on a lot of things, like how well the code itself is structured and how source control is done. Are you mentioning this for completeness?

Not against this, just not sure where we're going with the thought

Author: This was suggested to be mentioned so I asked a customer what their thoughts on this topic was in relation to feature flags. Microservices vs. monoliths is not directly linked to trunk-based with feature flags, but I think this is a snippet that could be expanded to its own post and maybe linked from this doc to the future one. Definitely a provocative conversation-starter topic.

In the Unleash Admin UI, open a project and click **New feature flag**.

![Create a new feature flag in the Unleash Admin UI.](/img/use-case-new-flag.png)

Next, name the new feature flag. The purpose of this flag is to manage the deployment of a new or incomplete feature. Therefore, the flag we are creating is considered a Release flag type. While release flags are invaluable, they should be short-lived to prevent codebase complexity and technical debt accumulation.

![Create a feature flag by filling out the form fields.](/img/use-case-create-tbd-flag.png)

Once you have completed the form, click **Create feature flag**.

Once your flag is created, you can build a feature in your application code while keeping it hidden in production.

### Effectively Manage your Feature Flag and Code

When implementing trunk-based development with Unleash, it's crucial to have a well-structured process for managing your feature flags and the associated code. This ensures the trunk remains in a deployable state while allowing teams to work independently on different features.

> #### Establish Consistent Naming Conventions

Reviewer: Worth linking to our docs on flag [naming patterns](https://docs.getunleash.io/reference/feature-toggles#set-a-naming-pattern)?

Develop a clear and consistent naming convention for your feature flags. This will help maintain clarity and make it easier to understand the purpose and context of each flag. Some recommended elements to include in your flag names:

-   The feature or functionality the flag is associated with
-   The environment or user segment the flag is intended for (e.g., "prod", "beta", "mobile\*users")

> -   A version or iteration number, if applicable

Reviewer: I'm not sure I completely understand what the version number is for?

:::note
Depending on the size and scope of a feature you’re developing, you may need more than one flag. Generally, we recommend creating as few flags as possible per feature, as making too many flags associated with one feature can become more complex to manage over time with trunk-based development. Our documentation on [best practices for feature flags at scale](/topics/feature-flags/best-practices-using-feature-flags-at-scale) provides more concrete details on large-scale feature flag management.
:::

#### Leverage Tagging and Metadata

> In addition to meaningful names, apply relevant tags and metadata to your feature flags in Unleash. This metadata can include information such as:

Reviewer: Metadata? Like in the description of the flag?

Author: Yes!

-   The team or product area responsible for the flag
-   The release timeline or planned retirement date
-   Associated Jira tickets or GitHub issues
-   Relevant documentation or context
-   [Tagging](/reference/tags) and metadata make it easier to search, filter, and manage your feature flags, especially as the number of flags grows.

> Click **Create new tag** in the Unleash Admin UI to add these details to your feature flag.

Reviewer 2: I think we need a phrase to connect this section with the previous. Also, it's not clear where in the Unleash Admin UI we are

Author: The sections were switched around. I updated this.

![Create a tag with relevant data to better organize your feature flags. A modal will pop up to name and save as many tags as you need.](/img/use-case-tbd-tagging.png)

#### Automate Flag Lifecycle Management

As your codebase and development processes mature, consider automating key aspects of feature flag management. This can include:

-   Automated flag archiving and removal: Set rules to automatically archive or remove flags that have been inactive for a certain period, reducing technical debt.
-   Integration with your CI/CD pipelines: Automatically create, update, or toggle flags as part of your deployment workflows, ensuring flags stay in sync with the codebase.
-   Reporting and analytics: Generate regular reports on flag usage, performance, and health to proactively identify opportunities for optimization.

> Automation helps maintain a clean, well-organized feature flag landscape, even as your organization scales its trunk-based development efforts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Automation helps maintain a clean, well-organized feature flag landscape, even as your organization scales its trunk-based development practices.
```

## Control Feature Rollouts

Once a feature is complete, feature flags enable controlled rollouts. You can gradually expose the feature to users, starting with specific groups or environments, without needing to redeploy the code.

For trunk-based development, you can create a gradual rollout strategy to:

-   Determine the percentage of users exposed to the new feature
-   Determine the percentage of users that get exposed to each version of the feature

> -   Per-customer release

Reviewer 2: The last two points in the list do not fit with the introductory sentence. Would start with a verb to keep the items parallel (same structure)

-   General release

> To target users accordingly, let's create an [activation strategy](/reference/activation-strategies). This Unleash concept defines who will be exposed to a particular flag. Unleash comes pre-configured with multiple activation strategies that let you enable a feature only for a specified audience, depending on the parameters under which you would like to release a feature.

Reviewer: Small detail here but a flag that's on in Unleash always has an activation strategy. If you haven't changed that in anyway it's set to 100% rollout, so you'll need to delete or just edit that strategy

> To target users accordingly, let's create an [activation strategy](/reference/activation-strategies). This Unleash concept defines who will be exposed to a particular flag. Unleash comes pre-configured with multiple activation strategies that let you enable a feature only for a specified audience, depending on the parameters under which you would like to release a feature.

Reviewer 2: We should only really promote the gradual rollout strategy as the rest are deprecated:

```suggestion
To target users accordingly, let's create an [activation strategy](/reference/activation-strategies). This Unleash concept defines who will be exposed to a particular flag. With Unleash, you can define a gradual rollout strategy to enable a feature only for a specified audience, depending on the parameters under which you would like to release a feature.
```

Reviewer: I think this suggestion is good but the other strategies aren't deprecated, unless this happened recently and no one told me. Custom strategies are deprecated and there's a few legacy strategies that are deprecated and inaccessible through the UI but Standard, User Ids, Remote Address, and Hostnames are alive and kicking, even if they're not the default.

Reviewer 2: Yes sorry, should have said either deprecated or unfavorable. I was under the impression that we want to drive people away from using those strategies (user ID, IP, etc.), and my recommendation is that we do that in the docs as well, not just the product

> ![Add a strategy to configure a release process for your flag.](/img/use-case-tbd-add-strategy.png)

Reviewer 2: Is this the intended screenshot? I feel like it doesn't fit well with the surrounding text. I'd probably do one of an activation strategy open so we can see the rollout percentage

Author: I updated the screenshot.

> The gradual rollout strategy form has multiple fields that control the rollout of your feature. You can name the strategy something relevant to the feature you’re building, but this is an optional field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Next, configure the rollout percentage so only a certain portion of your users are targeted. For example, you can adjust the dial so that 35% of all users are targeted. The remaining percentage of users will not experience any variation of the new feature. Adjust the rollout dial to set the percentage of users the feature targets, or keep it at 100% to target all users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, let's create a new activation strategy and configure the rollout percentage so only a certain portion of your users are targeted. For example, you can adjust the dial so that 35% of all users are targeted. The remaining percentage of users will not experience any variation of the new feature. Adjust the rollout dial to set the percentage of users the feature targets, or keep it at 100% to target all users.
```

> There are two more advanced extensions of a default strategy that you will see available to customize in the form:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> -   [Strategy variants](/reference/strategy-variants)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> -   [Strategy constraints](/reference/strategy-constraints)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> With strategy variants and constraints, you can extend your overall strategy. They help you define more granular conditions for your feature beyond the rollout percentage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define more granular conditions for your feature beyond the rollout percentage, you can use [strategy variants](/reference/strategy-variants) and [constraints](/reference/constraints).
```

## Simplify Rollbacks

In trunk-based development, the ability to quickly roll back a feature can mean the difference between a minor hiccup and a major service disruption.

> When issues are detected, Unleash makes it easy to quickly roll back a problematic feature by simply turning off the corresponding feature flag in your production environment, allowing teams to disable problematic features with just a single click. This allows development teams to address problems swiftly without the need for complex rollback procedures or full code deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When issues are detected, Unleash makes it easy to quickly roll back a problematic feature by simply turning off the corresponding feature flag in your production environment. This allows development teams to address problems swiftly without the need for complex rollback procedures or full code deployments.
```

### The One-Click Rollback Process

Imagine you've just rolled out a new checkout process. Shortly after launch, you detect performance issues or unexpected user behavior. To mitigate this issue, the process to roll back is straightforward:

1. Navigate to the Unleash Admin UI
2. Locate the feature flag for the specific feature

> 3. Toggle the flag to the "Off" position in the production environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Toggle the flag to the "off" position in the production environment
```
